Here with me
now is White House National Security
adviser Jake Sullivan.
Thank you so much for being here
this morning.
An Israeli official told CNN
that at least one
American citizen
is expected to be part of today's
release of hostages.
Can you confirm
how many Americans are on that list?
And do you know who they are yet?
Well, just taking a step back then,
the 50 hostages that were part of this
initial four day deal,
those were women and children.
And there are three Americans
who fall into that category,
two women and one child.
Now, we know those three were missing.
We cannot
say for certain
whether all three of them
are still alive.
But we do know this.
We have reason to believe that today
one American will be released.
And I say reason to believe
because I want to be cautious
about making any firm statements
until we actually see that individual
crossed the border to safety
and ultimately be reunited
with their family.
We're dealing with Hamas.
We are in a don't trust but verify
situation here.
And so we have reason to believe
that there will be
an American released today.
We have been in close touch
with the Israelis, with the Qataris,
with the Egyptians
over the last 24 hours.
President Biden
has been personally engaged
with the emir of Qatar on this issue.
And so today should be a good day,
a joyful day.
But until we actually see
it happen,
understanding to remain
really at the edge of our seats. Yeah.
And that's completely understandable.
Having said that,
do you have reason to believe
that the American you're talking about is
four year old Abigail Dunn?
Here's what I'll say.
We are now hopeful that Abigail
will be released,
reunited with her family.
She turned four just two days ago.
She has been through hell.
She had her
parents killed right in front of her
and has been held
hostage for the last several weeks.
We are hopeful that she will be released.
I'm not going to confirm that it's today,
but I am going to say
that we have
growing optimism about Abigail
and we will now
watch and see what happens.
Jake, later in the show, I'm
going to talk to the parents
of a 22 year old IDF soldier
who is an American citizen.
Do you have any information
on his condition
and that of other Americans
still in captivity?
And is there any progress
towards bringing them home?
Ten of which of the IDF soldiers?
Are you referring to his.
His name is Omar Neutra.
I actually had the opportunity
to meet his parents at the White House,
along with the family members
of other American hostages and I know
just listening to them
that they are going through incredible
pain and uncertainty and difficulty.
And I can't even imagine
what that could possibly feel like.
I told them directly
and and we've been candid
about what we know
and don't know that
we do not know
the specific whereabouts
or condition of Omar or other Americans,
because until the end of this deal,
until the end of tomorrow,
we will not have from the Red Cross
proof of life or other information
related to their ability
to visit hostages.
So as we learn that information,
we will absolutely
share it with the parents.
But no, I do not sitting here today.
I'm not in a position
to confirm the precise
condition or whereabouts of Omar
or other American hostages.
You said that
you hope that you will get information
from the Red Cross, though,
after this initial deal is complete.
Prime Minister Netanyahu said that
that also said
that the Red Cross
would be allowed to visit hostages
still being held by Hamas
to ascertain their status.
But Israeli officials
say it hasn't happened.
Did Hamas, in fact, agree to that?
And do you have confidence
that it will happen?
If so.
That is part of the deal.
We expect it will happen.
I'm not going to characterize myself
as confident in anything right now
because, again, we're in a don't trust
but verify circumstance.
But we do believe that Hamas is obliged
to maintain its part of the commitment
on Red Cross visitation of the hostages.
And we expect Qatar in Egypt
and other countries
to hold Hamas accountable
to fulfill that commitment
by the end of tomorrow.
Israeli officials are signaling
that they plan to resume their offensive,
the military offensive,
as soon as this pause expires.
The defense
minister, Yoav Gallant,
said yesterday, quote,
Any further negotiations will be
held under fire.
Is Israel rejecting calls from the U.S.
to hold off on its offensive
in order to try to continue negotiations?
Well, first, Stan,
just to
be clear about the terms of this deal,
Israel has already agreed
that it will continue
to pause fighting day by day
after the end of the four days
as long as Hamas
keeps releasing hostages.
So the ball is really in Hamas's court.
If Hamas wants to see in it
an extension of the pause in fighting,
it can continue to release hostages.
If it chooses not to release hostages,
then the end of the pause is
its responsibility,
not Israel's,
because it is holding these hostages
completely illegitimately
and against all bounds of human decency.
So just to be clear, though.
Really, we will see what Hamas ends up
choosing to do. Yeah.
So to be clear, if Hamas, after this
four day pause is over,
says, okay, here's
the next list of hostages
that we will release,
Israel will continue its military pause.
No question.
That is correct.
Ten hostages per day
for as many days as Hamas releases
ten hostages.
Israel will continue the pause
in the fighting.
That's part of the terms of the deal
that Israel agreed to.
That's a commitment Israel has made.
And now, as I said before,
the ball is in Hamas's court.
Have any of the hostages
who have been freed
provided any insight or intelligence
to Israel and U.S.
officials that could help locate
those still in Gaza?
We are just at the beginning
of learning
about the debriefings of those hostages.
So I will withhold comment until
there can be more time
for that to take place.
We're just talking about
the last couple of days
that hostages have been released
in the early hours
have really been much more
about caring for their trauma,
their pain, and also getting them
reunited with their families.
So it's going to take a little while
for us
to get that information,
for Israel to get that information.
But you can be sure that Israel
is focused on learning anything
it can about whereabouts,
locations and other information
based on conversations
they have with the released hostages
in the days ahead.
Another major
aspect of this deal
is that it is allowing
for significant amounts
of desperately needed
humanitarian aid,
fuel, medicine, water,
food to enter Gaza.
President Biden said
there are mechanisms in place
to ensure those supplies
go to civilians and not Hamas.
What are those
mechanisms and do you have any indication
that they have been in place
or has Hamas actually benefited
from this pause?
Well, first, Dan,
there's the inspection mechanism.
The Israelis at a
crossing called Nitzan to
check all of the trucks before they go
in through the Rafah crossing into Gaza.
And they checked to make sure that it is,
in fact, humanitarian supplies
and not goods that could help Hamas
in its military campaign.
Second, those trucks go to U.N.
depots
and to other humanitarian organizations
that are vetted and trusted partners.
And once they are in the hands
of the United Nations
and humanitarian organizations,
they are distributed
directly to the people.
And we have seen this work
over the course of the last
several weeks
as humanitarian assistance has ramped up.
We've seen it work
that it's actually getting to people
and that it's not being diverted
into the hands of Hamas.
But that's something
that we have to continue
to focus on, on an ongoing basis.
President Biden stays in close
touch with the Israeli
leadership on this, with the U.N.
leadership and with others
to make sure, in fact,
the aid is getting to where it belongs,
which is the innocent people
who are suffering.
I want to look ahead a little bit
and ask about Prime Minister Netanyahu,
because he is,
as you well know,
in a precarious domestic
political situation.
He knows that
as soon as this war
with Hamas is over, he's
going to face questions
that he's been putting off
about the failure to prevent
the October seven attacks.
Questions about his
tenure as prime minister.
Is there any concern
inside the Biden administration
that Netanyahu doesn't
necessarily
see it as being in his interest
to end this war as quickly as possible?
Look,
I'm not going to
speculate on Israeli politics.
What we're going to do
is just stay focused on
who's sitting in the chair
of Prime minister,
and that is Prime Minister
Netanyahu, and deal with him
straight up
on the issues
that we are confronting today.
And President Biden has been able,
through his direct diplomacy
with Prime Minister
Netanyahu, as well as his diplomacy
with Arab leaders
to generate the introduction
of humanitarian assistance,
the safe departure of foreign nationals,
including Americans from Gaza.
The first pause
in the fighting in 50 days
since this conflict began.
And hostage releases.
So President Biden
believes that his engagement
with Prime Minister
Netanyahu has paid dividends.
He's going to continue
to focus on that high level,
direct leader to leader diplomacy
and leave others to determine
the politics,
the political considerations.
We'll stay focused on the task at hand.